- Welcome to DSE 220X: Fundamentals of Machine Learning.
In this course, you will get an intensive grounding
in building models from data and using these models
to make predictions.
We'll cover the most widely used machine learning methods,
logistic regression, support vector machines,
kernel methods, principal component analysis,
random forests, neural nets, and so on.
We'll see applications of these methods
to problems in image understanding,
sentiment analysis, language processing,
personality testing, and many other domains.
Most of all, we'll really delve into the fundamentals
of these methods.
We won't think of them as recipes to be blindly followed,
but rather as interesting approaches that,
once understood,
are amenable to all kinds of modifications and improvements.
So in order to get to this level of understanding,
we will go into the mathematical foundations
of machine learning.
There are basically three types of math that we will need:
probability, linear algebra, and optimization.
We'll develop all three of these areas quite carefully,
because they're really crucial to a mastery
of machine learning.
So at the end of the day, what are the skills
that you will acquire from this course?
First, a comfortable familiarity
with the most widely-used machine learning methods.
What are they?
How do they work?
Why do they work?
What kinds of data are they good for?
What are their strengths and weaknesses?
What is going on under the hood?
This will help you assess which method or methods
are most suitable for a particular problem.
It will also help you understand and interpret
the results that you're getting.
The second skill that you'll get from this course
is the ability to take existing methods
and adapt them for a particular application.
Sometimes, it's okay to just use an off-the-shelf method,
but very often, this gets a level of performance
that is not quite what you were hoping for,
and in order to get to the next level,
what you need is to do something customized.
To either build upon an existing method
and modify it in some way,
or perhaps to transform the data.
What are effective ways of doing this?
Last, but not least, this course
will give a sufficiently thorough grounding
in the foundations of machine learning
that will help you to keep up with this field
that is really evolving very rapidly.
Now for each of the methods that we study,
you'll get a Jupiter notebook or two
that contains code and visualizations
that illustrate the method on some suitable data sets.
You can take these and play around with them
to really get a feel for how these methods work.
There will also be programming projects
that will give you the opportunity
to think outside the box a little bit
and to creatively build upon existing methods
to solve new problems.
At the end of the course,
this collection of projects will essentially constitute
a sort of repertoire, a portfolio,
of self-contained notebooks that you can show other people.
You know, to impress your friends, for example.
Okay, so that's a little bit of an overview of the course.
Let me also tell you a little bit about myself.
I'm a professor here,
at the University of California-San Diego,
and I've been here for about 15 years or so.
The things I work on are machine learning and algorithms.
These are the two areas that I care the most about.
And this particular course, DSE 220X,
is closely modeled on a class that I teach here,
and that basically, I wanted to open up
to a much broader audience.
So I hope you like it.