- Positive semidefinite matrices are square matrices
that have many special properties.
They arise all over the place in machine learning.
So today, we'll see what it means for a matrix to be
positive semidefinite, and we'll look at some of the
properties of these matrices.
We'll also cover the important question of how
you figure out if a matrix is of this type.
Now, when we were talking about convexity,
we said that a function of one variable is convex
if its second derivative is always positive.
When you have a function of D variables however,
the second derivative is a D by D matrix.
What might it mean for a D by D square matrix
to be positive?
How could we define that?
Well, one natural notion is to say that a matrix is positive
if all the entries in it are positive.
This is reasonable enough, but it turns out to be
a superficial notion that doesn't really help us very much.
There's a deeper and more insightful notion.
We can say that a matrix,
a square matrix, is positive
if the quadratic function defined by it is always positive.
Hmmm, let's see what this might mean.
Okay, so here's a matrix.
What is the quadratic function defined by this matrix?
Well if you recall, the quadratic function
defined by this matrix is the function that maps a vector x
to x transpose Mx.
So in this particular example, x has to be
a two dimensional vector, okay.
And the quadratic function sends this vector,
say x one, x two, to x transpose,
so x one, x two times M,
one, one, one, one times x, x one, x two.
What is that?
Well, let's work it out.
Let's start by doing this.
So we get x one, x two,
and here we get x one plus x two,
x one plus x two.
And now we do the last product and we get
x one squared plus two x one x two
plus x two squared.
This is the quadratic function defined by the matrix, okay?
Now if you look at the function, you can see
that it can also be written like this:
x one plus x two squared.
And when you write it like that, it's a square
which means that it always has to be greater than
or equal to zero, no matter what x you plug in, okay?
We have a matrix, in this case two by two.
It defines a quadratic function on two variables,
and this function is always greater than or equal to zero
no matter what x you plug in.
So we call this matrix N positive semidefinite.
More generally, let's say we have a D by D square matrix.
In that case the quadratic function defined by the matrix
is this one, that sends a D dimensional vector x
to x transpose Mx.
So what exactly is x transpose Mx?
Well, it works out to a number.
And if you multiply it out, you'll see that it's
actually just the summation.
It's the sum over all ij of the ij entry of the matrix,
times the i-th entry of x times the j-th entry of x.
And if you add all those things up, that's x transpose Mx.
So we'll say that a matrix N is positive semidefinite
if first of all, it is symmetric, and second,
if this quadratic function, x transpose Mx, is always
greater than or equal to zero, no matter what x you plug in.
This turns out to be a very powerful notion
of what it means for a matrix to be positive.
So let's look at an example, okay?
So, we've seen that this matrix is positive semidefinite,
we just worked through that example.
What about this other matrix over here?
Is that positive semidefinite as well?
Well, it's a two by two matrix, so the quadratic function
is the one that sends x one, x two
to x transpose Mx, and if we just plug into our
usual expansion, this would be, it would send this to
x one squared
plus four x one x two plus x two squared.
That's the quadratic function given by the matrix.
So is this always greater than or equal to zero?
You know what, let's try some values.
What about trying x one equals one
and x two equals minus one?
What happens then?
In that case we get one minus four plus one,
which is negative two.
Okay, so this matrix is not positive semidefinite.
And yet, it looks more positive than the other matrix,
which we know is positive semidefinite.
Here's another question.
Suppose we have a diagonal matrix.
Under what conditions is it positive semidefinite?
Okay, so we have some diagonal matrix, so the diagonal
entries are M one one, M two two, all the way to MDD.
And everything else is a zero.
When is a matrix like this positive semidefinite?
Well, we know x transpose Mx has to be greater than
or equal to zero.
Why don't we try this x?
Let's try the vector x, which is zero everywhere,
except for a one at the i-th position.
Okay so it's all zeroes
except for a one at the i-th position.
What is x transpose Mx?
Well if we think of our summation,
the sum of Mijxixj,
you can see that x transpose Mx is just the i i entry
of the matrix.
And so we know that this has to be greater than
or equal to zero.
So that gives us a simple condition.
A diagonal matrix is positive semidefinite
if and only if all the diagonal entries
are greater than or equal to zero.
So for diagonal matrices, it's very easy to check.
Okay.
Now suppose we have a positive semidefinite matrix M,
what about two times M?
Is that positive semidefinite as well?
Yes it is.
And more generally what about c times M?
Well, let's take a look.
So, we have x transpose c times Mx,
we can see it's just a constant, so we can pull it out.
So it's c times x transpose Mx.
And M is positive semidefinite, so this is greater than
or equal to zero.
C times that, is that greater than or equal to zero?
Yes, provided c is greater than or equal to zero.
So the answer is yes
if c is greater than or equal to zero.
Here's a related question.
Suppose you have two matrices that are each
positive semidefinite.
What about their sum?
Is that positive semidefinite?
Well again, we can just try directly by plugging in
to the definition.
Let's take their sum, M plus N, and look at x transpose
M plus N x.
Now we can factor this,
this is just equal to x transpose Mx plus x transpose Nx.
And each of these are greater than or equal to zero.
So the whole thing is greater than or equal to zero.
And so the answer to this question is just a simple "yes."
Okay.
So we've seen many properties of positive semidefinite
matrices, but the thing that we're gonna have to do
pretty often is to figure out whether a given
matrix is positive semidefinite.
Now technically that means that we have to check if x
transpose Mx is greater than or equal to zero for all x.
That's difficult to do because there are infinitely
many choices for x.
Is there a simple way?
Is there some more direct way of checking
whether a matrix is positive semidefinite?
And indeed there is.
There's a very simple condition.
It's positive semidefinite if it's of the form UU transpose.
So let's just briefly go over the justification for this.
So, let's say that M is of this form, UU transpose,
and U is just any old matrix,
let's say it's an R by D matrix, okay.
And let's just go and check all the properties
for positive semidefinite.
So first of all, is M even a square matrix?
Well let's see.
M is UU transpose.
U is R by D, so, and U transpose is D by R,
so M is an R by R matrix.
Yes, it's square.
Okay, we're off to a good start.
Now is M symmetric?
Okay.
Let's see.
Well, UU transpose, what's the transpose of that?
What is that equal to?
Well if you remember we had this formula for transpose,
AB transpose is B transpose, A transpose,
so if we apply that we get U transpose transpose
times U transpose.
What is transpose transpose, well if you just transpose
a matrix twice, you get back the same matrix,
so that's just UU transpose.
And yes, M transpose equals M, so it is symmetric.
Okay, so just one last property to check, okay.
So x transpose Mx, we plug in, UU transpose for M.
And now we have this matrix vector product
involving four terms,
we can just parenthesize this however we like.
So let's do it like this, let's put the parentheses there.
Okay.
And let's look at these terms.
Now, x transpose U.
By again using this transpose formula, we can just
write that as U transpose x transposed.
And now, U transpose x is just a vector,
and so we get something of the form,
vector transposed with itself.
That's familiar, if you remember Z transpose Z
is just the length of Z squared, okay?
So U transpose x transposed times U transpose X
is just the length of U transpose x squared.
And since it's the squared length, it has to be
greater than or equal to zero.
And so a matrix of this form
has to be positive semidefinite.
This will turn out to be a very useful rule.
Now, essentially the same argument can be used
to show something else that will be useful
which is that any covariance matrix
is guaranteed to be positive semidefinite.
So here's a picture that I would like to leave you with.
We're talking about square matrices, say D by D matrices.
Some of these matrices are symmetric,
that is M equals M transpose.
This is a special property.
An even more special case is when the quadratic function
defined by the matrix,
x transpose Mx, is always greater than or equal to zero,
no matter what x you plug in.
These are the positive semidefinite matrices.
They arise all the time in machine learning
and we rely upon them very heavily
in many different contexts.
Okay, that's enough for today.
We've finally seen what it means for a matrix
to be positive semidefinite,
and we've already seen one use of these matrices
in deciding whether a function is convex.
We'll soon see many more uses.
See you soon.